Travel options are limited in some places, and overcrowded and inconvenient in others. Congestion causes delays on the region’s roadways, and walking and biking are impossible or unsafe in many areas. Northern New Jersey needs a safe, convenient and reliable transportation system that is well-maintained, and in which all the parts connect seamlessly. A safer system would save lives, and reduce the suffering and costs associated with crashes and accidents. A seamless and reliable system could connect people with the places they need to go, increasing their access to well-paying jobs, good schools, shopping, needed services, recreation and arts and cultural resources. Improving the capacity and connectivity of the transportation system can reduce travel times and increase travel and route options. Greater support for shared-ride modes, including public transit and shuttles for people without access to private vehicles, not only expands access to opportunity for these individuals but also helps reduce energy use and harmful pollutants. Furthermore, creating more options for walking and bicycling will contribute to better public health and healthier communities.
New York City is generally accessible via auto
and public transit from the region’s suburban areas. All ten suburb-to-NYC O-D pairs
studied have viable auto and transit travel paths. There is, however, variation in how
direct or competitive transit travel is to auto, and in what modes are available. For instance,
transit travel time between Denville and Midtown Manhattan is often shorter
than that for auto in peak hours due to the availability of semi-direct rail service.
Bottlenecks and crashes at
the tunnels and bridges connecting northern New Jersey and New York City cause daily
severe delays lack of alternative entries into the city. However, unpredictable roadway
travel and bottleneck congestion present in other sections of the system also present
challenges.
Public transit trips access New York primarily
via commuter rail, PATH rapid transit and bus, through Penn Station, PATH stations and
the Port Authority Bus Terminal (PABT). Where frequent service, bus priority treatment
and express rail service are offered during peak hours, public transit can provide comparable
or faster travel than auto. Exclusive bus lane (XBL) use on Rt. 495, for example,
produces dramatic (upwards of a half hour) time savings for bus trips between Kenilworth
and Upper Manhattan, bypassing heavy congestion. Future growth in ridership,
however, faces capacity constraints in the transit system.
Access to and from the public transit stations and stops (first and last mile travel) is a significant issue for northern New Jersey suburbs. Much of the region is not within walking distance of rail stations or bus stops with service to New York City
Major urban areas are
predominantly connected through highways and principal arterials. As most of these
urban areas are concentrated in the eastern part of the region, travel distances are relatively
short when considered at the regional scale.
Most roadways
experience increased travel times due to unpredictable travel conditions and bottleneck
congestion during peak hours. Urban areas proximate to New York City experience
the most unpredictable travel conditions. In addition to affecting auto travel, bus
transit on-time performance and freight movement are also impacted.
Most major urban areas have
frequent rail or city bus connections. Major parts of the urban areas also lie within
walkable and bikeable distances of the transit stops, further increasing the effectiveness
of transit travel.
Transit services between many urban
areas in northern New Jersey is competitive to auto in terms of travel time. Between
most major urban areas there are direct or single transfer routes for most of the day
with increased services during the peak hours. For instance, transit travel time between
Jersey City and New Brunswick, and Hoboken and Elizabeth, are competitive to auto
travel time.

While the New Jersey Turnpike and Garden State
Parkway provide important connections for these suburbs, dispersed suburban land use
increases reliance on principal arterials, including state and county roads to provide access
among suburban communities. For instance, South Brunswick in Middlesex County
depends on US Routes 1 and 130 and NJ Route 27 for access from the northeast and
southwest.
Many roadways experience
increased travel time due to unpredictable roadway travel conditions and bottleneck
congestion during peak hours. Some roadways also experience congestion during off
peak and weekend hours because of the presence of shopping centers and tourist destinations.
While transit services are available between
many suburban areas in northern New Jersey, they are limited in terms of competitiveness
to auto travel time and convenience, except during peak hours and along densely
populated and commercially developed corridors. Limited availability of direct services,
favorable auto circulation and sufficient parking spaces in suburban areas, are some of the
conditions which make transit travel less attractive between suburban areas. For instance,
travel from Sayreville to the Asbury Park area via transit requires multiple transfers almost
doubling the transit travel time over the auto travel time.
Most places have limited access to rail and longdistance bus stops and are not within walking and biking distance of the transit stops.

Other movements are not as amenable for public transit users. To access Elizabeth
from Chatham, for example, a commuter needs to transfer from the Morris and Essex Line to the Northeast Corridor Line in New
York or Secaucus making the travel time uncompetitive with the auto. Notably, local connections to stations at both ends of the trip, i.e.
the issue of “first/last mile” access to the public transit system, are also a challenge.
While the road network is
sparser in rural western counties and the Pine Barrens area of the region than in urban
areas, rural communities are accessible via principal arterials, including state and county
roads. Highways provide for through travel and themselves are major economic corridors.
Congestion is normally less of an issue in these areas with the exception of
hotspots in rural towns (such as Flemington).
Transit services connecting rural areas are limited. These services
tend to be regional or inter-regional rail or bus, commuter routes connecting
densely populated and commercially developed points that pass through rural areas,
local circulator routes that serve populations without autos, or niche services targeting
specific markets. Favorable auto circulation and parking conditions in rural areas, coupled
with limited population and employment densities tend to work against transit
enhancements in these markets.
With lower population and development
levels, connectivity in rural areas is most effectively achieved by auto. However,
around rural town centers opportunities exist to improve pedestrian and bicycle facilities
to enhance local access. These towns may also have transit options furthering rural
community access to the broader urban and suburban region.
Bike sharing would address the problem of safe and secure
bicycle storage for the county’s many space-challenged
residents of apartments and condominiums.
Hudson County has a dense public transportation network,
and most people live and work relatively near transit stops,
thus a bike share system would help solve the problem of
covering the “first and last” mile trips.
About half of the users of bike share systems in the U.S.
are tourists. As Hudson County has numerous tourist
destinations, bike sharing could be an important mode of
transport serving them.
Need to promote healthy/active transportation options
Need to produce inclusive bikeshare option
Need to improve accessibility to jobs, recreation, etc
growing population needs better access to jobs, services, and recreational opportunities
economic development requires efficient transportation
Enhancing the movement of people and goods by reducing congestion and delays.
Improving the efficiency of the surface transportation system through increased consistency of travel times from day to day.
Improving operations of those transportation network segments that serve freight movements, key economic sectors, and trade markets.
Reducing emissions and noise from the surface transportation network. A related consideration is to keep the transportation network operational during and immediately following severe weather events and related disruptions.
Reducing crashes, serious injuries, and fatalities on the surface transportation network. A related consideration is minimizing the impact of crashes on the operation of the transportation network when crashes do occur.
Increasing the integration and connectivity of the transportation system, across and between modes, thereby enhancing the ability of people to reach opportunities and activities, and generally making their trips better.
What changes to the transportation network
would contribute to the County’s resiliency in
responding to future storm events?
How can the County help to enhance connectivity
between modes?
Where should bicycle and pedestrian
investment be prioritized?
The population is aging and becoming more
culturally diverse. How will this influence
transportation?
What is the best way to get more people to and
from the airport for both jobs and travel?
need to improve and maintain existing facilities
need to provide frequent and dependable public transportation
need to improve pedestrian safety and walkability
need to support innovative traffic mitigation strategies and programs. North-south travel within Union County is heavily-congested on crossings of Route 22, as there are
limited opportunities to cross. Specifically, crossings at Diamond Hill Road/Bonnie Burn Road/Park
Avenue in Scotch Plains, New Providence Road in Mountainside and South Springfield Avenue in
Springfield are the only crossing opportunities on Route 22 in western Union County. Consequently,
these routes are substantially congested during peak hours. Union County has a role in working with the
NJDOT and municipalities to address this congestion and find opportunities to provide congestion relief.
upgraded or, as is the case with Elizabeth, will be upgraded. Other stations, including the smaller
stations along the Gladstone Line (like Berkeley Heights, Murray Hill and New Providence) and Raritan
Valley Line (like Garwood, Fanwood, and Netherwood), have not been fully modernized with high-level
platforms and other amenities. High-level platforms lower overall dwell time at stations. Dwell time is
the time a train spends at a station while passengers board or alight the train. Upgrading every platform
to be ADA compliant would not be cost-effective. NJ TRANSIT has developed an implementation plan
and policy that identifies key stations for ADA accessibility upgrades. See Table 8 – Stations with Handicapped Accessible Boarding and Alighting on the following page. A challenge for Garwood on the
Raritan Valley Line is more train service to its community. While several stops were added, more will be
needed to complement Garwood’s plan for transit oriented development nearby the station.
Pricing, supply and availability of parking spaces
varies from station to station in Union County. This
leads to shortages that municipalities must face at
some stations. In addition, while some stations
have seen recent parking expansions, there is a
major deficiency at most stations and the lack of
capacity is an issue for the host municipalities. The
ability to upgrade this parking is dependent on the
availability of land, local traffic concerns, site
suitability and other issues.
The prevalent issues for bus routes in the County are travel time and reliability, with many routes having
peak end-to-end travel times of more than an hour. While most customers do not travel the full route,
the overall travel times indicate that roadway congestion, stop frequency, route structure, high ridership
and roadway infrastructure impede the provision of efficient travel times and reliable service. Although
NJ TRANSIT’s MyBus provides real time travel information for trip origins, once passengers are on the
bus they are affected by travel time delays due to congestion. NJ TRANSIT collects information through
their Smart Bus systems. The Smart Bus data permits evaluation of traffic conditions, weather, detours,
access in and out of bus stops and variable passenger loading time.
While improvements in the transit system are necessary, so is the need to advocate for an affordable
transit fare structure. The continued rise in fares has and will continue to have an impact on the
affordability of travel within and outside of Union County as well as the attractiveness of the County to
business owners and residents. In particular, the emphasis on commuters bearing an increasing share of
transit funding has created hardships for transit dependents (low income, zero car and elderly
households) and has restricted the affordability radius for access to jobs. It is important to continue to
advocate for a balanced method of funding the transit system including state and federal subsidies,
private investment (including advertising and other opportunities), and the implementation of cost
efficiencies in addition to the reasonable contribution of fare revenues.
most roads in Union County were designed for 48-foot trucks, but current standards allow for 53-foot trucks, which is making road designs outdated in some places
There is a total of 13,100 linear feet of sidewalk that is either missing or in poor condition. Sidewalk was deemed
substandard if it did not meet ADA and PROWAG design guidelines. These requirements state that a path of travel
includes an unobstructed way of pedestrian passage. These pathways are required to have a minimum width of 60
inches to allow for two streams of traffic; however, sidewalk with a width of less than 60 inches is acceptable as long as
there is a passing space greater than 60 inches at an interval of no more than 200 feet. The sidewalks are also required
to have a minimum of 36 inches to travel around obstructions such as utility poles or fire hydrants. The Project team
declared sidewalk to be in poor condition if it was excessively cracked, crumbled or displayed areas of ponding.
Throughout the study area there is a total of 8,000 feet of gaps in the existing sidewalk on both the east (northbound) and
west (southbound) sides of River Road as shown on the Existing Conditions Pedestrian Facilities Maps, found in
Appendix H. In the southern section of the study area there is the largest running gap in the sidewalk, 2,000 feet,
between Thompson Lane and Old River Road (at the Edgewater Commons). Pedestrians were observed traversing
through knee-high grass and walking through nearby parking lots in order to safely travel to a point where they could
cross River Road. This segment of missing sidewalk has become a worn path utilized by pedestrians to access transit
stops and shops along River Road.
Lack of consistent shoulder or lane widths reduces predictability
Lack of bicycle loop detectors in the pavement inhibit bicycle traffic from following traffic signals
Lack of bicycle loop detectors in the pavement inhibit bicycle traffic from following traffic signals
Numerous right and left turn lanes conflicts
need to address safety and mobility issues
need to enhance livability and economic vitality of corridor
Support NJ TRANSIT and AMTRAK plans to improve rail service to Penn Station and bus service to PABT to address trans-Hudson public transit capacity constraints facing the region.
Implement new intelligent transportation techonology along I-78 and I-80 to address unpredictable roadway travel in these corridors.
Implement intersection and interchange improvements to relieve bottleneck congestion along travel paths.
Implement new intelligent transportation technology along I-78 and I-80 to address unpredictable roadway congestion in these corridors.
Consider improvement to roadways connecting urban areas that provide transit priority, especially along corridors with frequent unpredictable travel times and bottleneck congestion.
Implement intersection and interchange improvements to relieve bottleneck congestion along travel paths.
Implement new intelligent transportation technology along I-78 and I-80 to address unpredictable roadway congestion in thesecorridors.
Consider improvements to suburban arterial roadways that provide transit priority, especially along corridors with frequent unpredictable travel times and bottleneck congestion.
Improve access and connections to local and regional transit routes where direct transit between densely populated and commercially developed suburban communities is present. Also explore limited peak period express trip(s) and other service adjustments to increase transit attractiveness.
Implement intersection and interchange improvements to relieve bottleneck congestion along travel paths.
Implement new intelligent transportation technology along I-78 and I-80 to address unpredictable roadway travel in these corridors.
Consider improvements to suburban arterial roadways that provide transit priority, especially along corridors with frequent unpredictable travel times and bottleneck congestion.
Improve local connections to rail stations and long-distance bus stops, such as service improvements to shuttle buses and bicycle facilities.
Implement intersection and interchange improvements to relieve bottleneck congestion along travel paths.
Implement new intelligent transportation technology along I-78 and I-80 to address unpredictable roadway congestion in these corridors.
Improve and increase frequencies for bus and shuttle services to rail transit stations and express bus stops.
Consider improvements to roadways to provide priority for buses amid other traffic, especially along corridors with frequent unpredictable travel times and bottleneck congestion.
Implement intersection and interchange improvements to relieve bottleneck congestion observed along the travel paths.
Implement new intelligent transportation technology along I-78 and I-80 to address unpredictable roadway travel in these corridors.
Explore limited service or route adjustments where transit already exists in these markets to increase transit attractiveness.
Explore opportunities for improving pedestrian and bicycle access to rural towns, especially where local and regional transit is available.
The County could help facilitate this process by creating a County bicycle master plan and encouraging the cities to implement bike routes
As described in Chapter 3, the recommended system area was determined through a process that included equity measures. In addition, recommended station locations (shown in Figure 5.1 and described in Chapter 4 in detail below), were determined in part based on the locations of public/subsidized housing. Because there is no public investment being provided for the BNR system, it is important that the cities ensure that this goal is being met during system planning.
Hudson County should work with the system operator to offer a certain number of discounted memberships for the system. Such a program was included in BNR’s proposal. The County should be aware, though, that too many low-priced memberships can be detrimental to a privately owned system, as there will not be enough revenue to support operations. Therefore, the County may need to consider subsidizing such memberships for a robust program.
The issue of credit card access is limited or enabled by the background technology. For example, some bike share systems technically require a credit card to create an account. Others require it by policy only. The County must work with nextbike to understand whether an account can be created in the system without a credit card. If this is possible, then partner organizations and a small amount of funding can be set up to allow access to people without credit cards with proper identification verification and escrow funding for financial accountability. There have been no projects with such a setup to date, but Philadelphia’s project may include such characteristics.
: Most systems include an annual membership fee of $50 to $100 to be paid once a year. This cost can be a significant barrier to entry to lower-income populations. It is recommended that Hudson County consider strategies to lower this barrier to entry by introducing pricing structures such as annual membership paid in monthly installments, similar to a cell phone plan, and a pay-perride option of $1 to $3 per ride.
Although many systems have made some efforts towards creating an equitable system, few have earmarked specific funding for significant marketing and outreach for low-income communities. Non-digital marketing can be more expensive than the typical online approach using websites, earned media and social media. A key aspect of successful marketing and outreach is budget dedicated funding for this effort. Marketing materials also must be produced in languages spoken in the service area communities, which may not be English.
It will be important to the success of the outreach strategy to identify individuals within targeted communities to champion bike share and spread the word using various communications strategies, media, events and venues available in their communities. These trusted advocates could be political figures, community organizers, or even committed individuals with a proven means to influence their local communities. They can also advise the operator on the best messaging and means to communicate to their communities.
Experience from existing programs has found that it is not difficult to find community organizations that want to partner with bike share systems. However, there should be a limited number of important and effective partners that are brought on early in the system establishment to maximize the impact of the partnership.
It is important that Hudson County and the municipalities interested in bike share identify separate and dedicated funding to achieve the equity goal. Most systems around the country have not procured specific funding for outreach and low-cost memberships. This lack of funding has likely suppressed success of these programs. It is recommended that even with the privately funded BNR/nextbike system, the County fund these programs separately if a truly equitable system is desired.
It is recommended that Hudson County follow updates on equity programs around the country. It is anticipated that several cities in the next few years, most notably Philadelphia, will be dedicating significant funding to many of the above-recommended strategies to increase equity in bike share systems.
The Hudson County Division of Planning should take the lead on forming a Hudson County Bike Share Task Force to advance bike sharing in the county.
The task force should ensure that the Hudson County bike share system best meets the identified goals and objectives for a system in Hudson County, as described in this report and determined in consultation with the TAC and the public.
The task force will help ensure that the performance measures proposed in this report are used by the three urban municipalities to evaluate success of the BNR system.
The task force should encourage and support the municipalities as well as identify potential public-private partnerships to implement equity strategies to support low/no-cost bike share memberships.
The task force should encourage the adoption of Complete Streets policies by the county’s municipalities, create a county-wide bicycle master plan, and install robust bikeways designed to attract a diverse range of potential bicyclists and bike share users.
Collaborate, as required by MAP21, to enhance regional and statewide transportation asset management to: Develop state transportation management plans for National Highway System (NHS) facilities and for public transit assets; Develop state and regional performance targets and progress reporting mechanisms; Identify funding/resources and create coordinated workflows between regional and state agencies, and where possible, county and local governments.
Enhance the capacity of counties and municipalities to manage transportation assets effectively: Standardize data collection methods and incorporate all additional local NHS facilities not presently included per MAP-21 requirements; Catalogue and share data and integrate with other data for analysis and modeling.
Adopt Complete Streets policies throughout the region.
Expand public and stakeholder education efforts aimed at promoting adoption and implementation of Complete Streets policies at the local level.
Utilize the flexibility inherent in existing roadway design guidelines to create Complete Streets when engineering roadway improvement projects. This includes: the NJDOT Roadway Design Manual, American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) standards and National Association of City Transportation Officials (NACTO) design guides. Consider New Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards as well.
Update Complete Streets policies to include provisions for all forms of public transit and paratransit
Implement an annual program of professional development training for planning, design, engineering and public works professionals
Incorporate Complete Streets approaches in routine resurfacing, restriping and other maintenance projects.
Give priority funding consideration to projects that incorporate Complete Streets principles in design and construction.
Increase the number of Safe Routes to School (SRTS) non-infrastructure projects implemented in the region.
Develop and implement performance metrics that measure how well streets are serving all users, and use these metrics to inform project prioritization and capital programming.
Develop a regional Transit Hub strategic plan: Identify and map existing and potential future Transit Hub locations; Develop criteria and a process to prioritize Transit Hub locations for assessment and improvement; Assess current conditions at priority locations, including service levels and connections, customer information/amenities, first/last-mile access opportunities, parking management needs adjacent land uses and local pedestrian and bicycle environment; Develop recommendations to address identified needs and deficiencies at priority locations; Identify existing programs and processes that could be coordinated and leveraged to improve conditions at Transit Hub locations.
Develop, implement and assess the results of a "Transit Hub" Improvement Pilot Program at a minimum of three locations.
Based on the results of the pilot program, institutionalize the approach, including permanent program alignment.
Identify and advance opportunities for public-private partnerships and joint development at priority Transit Hub locations to help pay for improvements. This can be based on NJ TRANSIT's "Adopt-a-Station" program. Within current regulatory requirements create incentives that encourage private developers to contribute/provide/maintain bus shelters, sidewalk and other non-motorized / transit infrastructure and amenities that facilitate access for new development / re-development projects.  Perform a pilot project to test private developer transportation access incentives in conjunction with the "Transit Hub" Improvement Pilot Program.
Coordinate light rail, ferry and bus schedules at Weehawken and Hoboken ferry terminals.
Improve access to transit services through application of parking management techniques.
Improve first/last mile access to transit to serve the beginning or ends of trips where origins or destinations may be difficult or impossible to get to by a short walk from public transportation: Identify places or corridors where existing first/last mile services exist for core facilities (commuter rail, bus, light rail, PATH, county shuttles) and document their success factors, cost, partners, challenges and opportunities; Establish a pilot project to establish first/last mile services that meet suitable criteria, including the use of public/private funding and partnerships ; As appropriate, institutionalize a First/Last Mile Access to Transit program
Expand NJ TRANSIT?s ?Go-Bus? brand of rapid bus service enhancements in high-demand travel corridors such as Rt. 9, Rt. 17, the Union County Sustainability Corridor and others.
Working in conjunction with local communities, examine the potential to modernize, expand and relocate (as necessary) existing bus garages to improve operational efficiencies.
Eliminate axle-weight limitations for buses, which currently prevent low-floor vehicles from using many roads.
Complete PATH Modernization Program which includes signal systems upgrades.
Make efficient use of existing Trans-Hudson capacity by shifting demand and expanding off-peak rail and bus services where economically feasible.
Update the regional Coordinated Human Services Transportation Plan to continue to improve coordination of paratransit and community transportation services operating in the region
Develop a visualization tool (e.g., poster, website, and/or mobile application) to enhance coordination among transportation paratransit and community transportation providers and policy-makers.
Integrate private jitney transit services in the North Jersey region into the overall transportation system. This should include addressing safety concerns and the congestion impacts associated with existing operations.
Improve intra- and interstate private carrier bus services where feasible:  Identify options for service improvement, route changes and new routes; Explore changes in fare policies; Identify non-traditional sources of funding (public/public or public/private partnerships).
If feasible and permitted, implement recommendations of intra- and interstate private carrier bus study beginning with a pilot project between a select private carrier, private corporation, NJTPA and NJ TRANSIT to demonstrate the value of implementation.
Allocate funds to conduct an emerging technologies and entrepreneurial transportation services study: identify technology solutions and entrepreneurial transportation services being used in the region and elsewhere in the world, including Bridj ?pop-up? bus services as well as Lyft, Uber and other ride-sharing services; Develop recommendations for safely accommodating potentially disruptive technologies and managing the integration of private service innovations in the larger system of transportation options.
Identify and develop transit-supportive highway projects. This should include efforts to conduct a System Connectivity Study to examine bus (and street-based light rail) transit routes based on NJ TRANSIT route, service and ridership data and impacts to travel markets.
Pilot, at the local level, a requirement for sponsors of major new development projects to conduct Transit Assessments as part of NJDOT/County Access Permits and/or local zoning reviews.
Identify and develop transit-supportive highway projects: Identify potential roadway design and operational improvements (including ITS technologies) to enhance transit performance. Inform NJDOT problem statement development.
Identify and develop transit-supportive highway projects: Incorporate transit supportive highway projects into the NJDOT project pipeline.
Identify and develop transit-supportive highway projects: Coordinate state and local transit data related to supporting bus movement.
Improve and increase intrastate bus services where demand exists:  Implement recommendations from existing studies and where feasible considering financial and operational constraints and potential.
improve and increase intrastate bus services where demand exists:  Conduct additional analysis to identify potential locations for new or expanded service that considers ridership potential, cost-benefit and operations, routing and scheduling.
Improve and increase intrastate bus services where demand exists:  Develop and implement a"Community Transit" Pilot Project that identifies and explores the feasibility of redesigning and rebranding existing pubic and private bus routes and services to serve a regional network of Transit Hubs.
If successful, systematically expand implementation of "Community Transit" pilot program throughout the region.
Improve and expand Trans-Hudson commuter bus services, including but not limited to upgrading/ modernizing the Port Authority Bus Terminal complex.
Continue to advance planning efforts to expand Trans-Hudson passenger rail capacity.
Complete the ?Wye Bypass? project in order to increase the Hudson-Bergen Light Rail (HBLR) system capacity and Hoboken terminal capacity.
Continue to add HBLR car/fleet capacity with new train-sets and extended platforms where feasible.
Complete the Northern Branch extension and Route 440/Bayfront west side extension of the HBLR system.
Add PATH capacity on Newark-WTC service through extension of platforms and improvements to signal systems.
Address permitting issues to allow the completion of the Lackawanna Cut-off project and restore passenger rail service to Andover, NJ.
Advance planning and promote enhanced capacity at key locations (e.g., Newark Penn, Midline Loop [NEC], Summit/Millburn "turn back", the Hunter flyover, and triple tracking the Lehigh Line) in North Jersey.
Address lane departure crashes using center and edge line rumble strips, high friction surface treatments, and utility pole relocation or replacement.
Integrate a Towards Zero Deaths (TZD) approach to change safety awareness and culture in all Together North Jersey actions.
Conduct transit customer and local community safety education campaigns, field audits, social media outreach and professional training programs and initiatives
Continue NJ TRANSIT Board of Directors Safety and Security Committee efforts to review agency operational safety metrics such as number of customer and employee incidents, lost time, mean distance between failures , and identify best practices to achieve further safety improvements
Advance efforts by NJ TRANSIT?s new Office of System Safety to identify and establish common safety principles and practices across business lines.  Follow up on recommendations of NJ TRANSIT rail safety audit and other agency safety reviews.
Address intersection crashes and crashes involving mature drivers by improving traffic signal hardware and improving signage and markings.
Address pedestrian and bicycle crashes by implementing road diets and by installing and improving sidewalks, crosswalks, median refuge islands and pedestrian signal improvements.
Improve the quality, management and accessibility of crash data.
Address impaired drivers, aggressive drivers and unbelted vehicle occupants through High Visibility Enforcement (HVE), public information programs, and support of enforcement/adjudication activities.
Address motorcycle crashes through rider training courses and communication/outreach programs to increase all drivers? awareness of motorcycle safety.
Address pedestrian and bicycle crashes through driver and pedestrian education programs and bicycle rider education. Continue and expand programs like the Street Smart NJ pedestrian safety education campaign.
Address crashes involving young drivers through public information programs.
Address all SHSP emphasis areas on local roads, particularly pedestrian and bicyclists, through the Local Safety Program (LSP) and High Risk Rural Roads funding and Final Design Assistance Program funding and support.
Use NJ Innovation Acceleration Center (IAC) (ITS Architecture Committee) meetings to identify partnering opportunities where technology can strengthen economic development in the NJTPA region and encourage private sector and not-for-profit organizations to promote and advance technology projects.
Identify potential arterials through congestion and safety management systems, and review for signal hardware requirements. Determine the arterial management solution customized to the system that best improves safety, mobility, environment and sustainability while providing a reliable commute. The solution can range from simple optimization of coordinated signals to designing and deploying Adaptive Signal technology.
Host ITS data for field devices (i.e., VMS, Roadway Detection, Camera/CCTV, etc.) on the NJTPA Enterprise Geographic Information System (EGIS) system.
Integrate local shared services and private bus carrier schedule and real-time data into a GTFS format for distribution of real-time traveler information to the public.
Develop a unified website resource to support public and private entrepreneur awareness /access to transportation technology apps.  Expand NJTPA Developing Opportunities for Innovation in Transportation (DO-IT) to support training and education in technology apps.
Develop social media policies within transportation agencies that enable the use of crowd-sourced real-time information from customers that can inform and improve transportation operations.
Use the IAC to identify opportunities to share operations data between agencies for improving connectivity, transit on-time performance service and traveler information.
Continue to improve the management and coordination of real time transit operations and data to decrease passenger wait times and delay.
Identify best practices for integrating fare technology development and deployment (e.g. unified fare / toll payment systems, etc.) and explore budget, funding and management options.
Identify suitable locations and implement Active Traffic Management (ATM) strategies along selected limited access highway segments and arterials throughout the State: Conduct a study for NJDOT to identify specific segments and associated ATM strategies and cost-benefit analysis associated with each; Develop a concept of operations to identify how each strategy will operate as a system with related assets; Implement ATM strategies based on the identified locations and treatments resulting from the study.
Deploy real-time automated monitoring of park and ride and intermodal transit lot capacity to support traveler information along identified corridors.
Develop a Decision Support System (DSS) with NJ Office of Information Technology (OIT) to support operations of assets along roadways as part of an Integrated Corridor Management (ICM) concept.
Support development and implementation of technology and operational strategies for the recommendations being developed as part of the Comprehensive Regional Goods Movement Action Program for the New York-New Jersey Metropolitan Region (G-MAP). Steps include: develop a regional strategic plan for commercial vehicle enforcement operations, including a gap analysis; screening technologies; enforcement data integration; and data sharing opportunities.
Expanding coverage of current systems and ITS devices such as surveillance/ detectors to measure traffic flows, CCTV, DMS, and communications cable.
ATM strategies include dynamic speed limits, dynamic lane control, queue warning, dynamic shoulder lane, and junction control.
ATM study currently underway for NJDOT to identify specific segments and associated ATM strategies. Potential segments subject to change as a result.
The concept of a single regional electronic tag and a single monthly invoice incorporating all toll facilities in the northeast was very cutting edge when E-ZPass was first introduced. The concept has subsequently expanded to include most of the east coast (to North Carolina). Other enhancements have included high speed toll lanes and using E-ZPass for other payments (e.g., parking at the New York area airports). Similarly, New Jersey Transit has introduced advanced fare payment technologies, including “MyTix” that provides customers the convenience of buying rail tickets and passes securely from a mobile device. The agency also provides a contactless payment system using certain credit/debit cards and specially equipped mobile phones on selected bus routes and at the Newark AirTrain Station.
Linkages and protocols must ensure that personally identifiable information from the police CAD is never transmitted to the TMC.
NJDOT already has a robust program of Safety Service Patrols (SSP) and inter-agency coordination activities such as Incident Management Teams.
Some of the existing ITS-based technologies are relatively old – for example, NJ Transit is still using track circuits in many locations, and there are varying degrees of accuracy. Additionally, as is the case with old technology and systems that have been implemented over several years, there are multiple operations centers in geographically separated locations, with multiple legacy systems with multiple configurations.
Information to be used in support of integrated traveler information and ICM
TSP detects when a bus is nearing a signalized intersection and manages signal operation, turning the traffic signals to green sooner or extending the green phase, thereby allowing the bus to pass through more quickly.
Update signal timing parameters on state and local arterials on a more frequent basis as needed
Adaptive Traffic Signal Control continuously monitoring arterial traffic conditions and the queuing at intersections to dynamically adjust the signal timing parameters to smooth the flow of traffic along coordinated routes and to minimize overall stops and delays.
All the NJ transportation agencies have robust programs for traveler information – DMS (travel times, next transit vehicle arrival), web, use of social media (particularly NJ Transit). Information can be better integrated sothat travelers don’t need to switch between mode-specific websites and applications.
Inter-agency and regional coordination has long been a mainstay of transportation entities in New Jersey – as well as New York and eastern Pennsylvania – particularly during major incidents and construction activities, special events, and extreme weather conditions.
This regional coordination has been greatly supported and promoted by TRANSCOM, including automated information and video sharing between numerous public agencies via their OpenReach System.
DVRPC also promotes and proactively supports inter-agency coordination in the Philadelphia region, such as incident management coordination activities and information and video sharing viaits Regional Integrated Multi-Modal Information Sharing (RIMIS) project, using the same platform as TRANSCOM’s Open Reach.
Enhance the traveler information sources previously noted to include truck–specific information
The purpose behind G-MAP is to develop a comprehensive long-term regional goods movement plan for the New York/New Jersey region that establishes a framework and action plan for the identification and prioritization of freight strategies and projects within a 30-year planning horizon.
The impacts of and responses to Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy highlight how important adaptation can be, including the utilization of TSM&O strategies and supporting ITS.
This involves integrating existing databases (e.g., NJDOT Management System Integration [MSI], NJ Transit, TRANSCOM Open Reach, DVRPC RIMIS) providing a single access portal, consistent geo-referencing and formats, data mining, etc. in support of integrated traveler information, performance management, planning, and other Connected Corridor activities
Continue to maintain the bridges and roadways
of the County system as well as stormwater
facilities and work with the municipalities when
needs are identified within the system.
In addition, the County will continue to identify
funding opportunities and make applications to
improve the County roadway system and replace
obsolete and deficient bridges.
Support traffic signal retiming and optimization
on County roadways and support municipalities
to identify programs for financing the retiming
of signals.
Optimizing traffic signal timings and
coordination can reduce delays by 15-20% and
improve air quality. Traffic signals on County
roads are maintained by municipalities.
Continue to support NJDOT efforts to reduce
congestion and improve safety on state
highways in Union County. Advocate for
advancement of projects on Routes 22, 27 and
1&9.
Support the construction of a link between
I-278 and Route 1&9.
This improvement should reduce regional travel
along local roads and Route 439 in Elizabeth.
Support new technologies which make
roadways and vehicles more efficient.
Relieve spot congestion and improve air quality
through implementation of Intelligent
Transportation Systems (ITS).
Reduce peak hour traffic by working with and
encouraging business to use Transportation
Demand Management (TDM) strategies.
Support and integrate activities of EZ Ride TMA.
TDM programs, for example ride sharing,
carpools and shuttles, mitigate traffic
congestion, improve mobility and accessibility.
They improve air quality and optimize the
efficiency of the system by increasing travel
choices and reducing reliance on the single
occupant vehicle. The TMAs are critical
facilitators of TDM programs.
Identify primary arterials to be targeted for
congestion mitigation.
Explore opportunities to improve safety.
Continue to work with NJTPA and NJDOT to
identify high crash locations and apply for
funding to improve them.
Support municipal and state Complete Streets
policy implementation.
Continue to work with municipalities on
improvements to County roadways.
Support implementation of FHWA roadway
safety countermeasures.
Improving safety is a priority of the County.
FHWA recommends nine countermeasures to
address crashes that occur at intersections.
These include modern roundabouts, corridor
access management, backplates with reflective
borders on traffic signals, medians and
pedestrian crossing islands, pedestrian hybrid
beacons, enhanced delineation and friction for
horizontal curves and road diets.
Advocate for improvements to station facilities
and station access in Union County.
NJ TRANSIT can be encouraged to prioritize
improvements at station facilities.
Continue to advocate NJ TRANSIT for improved
rail service.
Continued advocacy efforts for additional
reverse commuter and one-seat ride service on
Raritan Valley Rail Line. As NJ TRANSIT plans for
rail expansion as part of the Gateway Project,
the ability to expand this service will eliminate
the capacity constraints hindering this service
and will make it more possible to implement.
Support transit supportive land use policies in
Union County.
Continue to be a leader in the State of New
Jersey and support/promote Transit Villages and
Transit Oriented Development. This will
encourage and support transit ridership in the
County.
Encourage the installation of enhanced
amenities and infrastructure at bus stops.
Support municipalities in their requests to install
bus shelters and stops at locations that warrant
these amenities.
Identify opportunities for multi-modal facilities.
Work with municipalities to study the potential
for additional multi-modal facilities in the
County, including a potential bus park-and-ride
in the western half of the County.
Encourage NJ TRANSIT to schedule better
coordinated connections between bus routes.
NJ TRANSIT should be encouraged to schedule
bus service with connections at important
locations in the County.
Support fares at equitable levels.
Advocate that fares remain equitable across the
state.
Support shuttle and reverse commute service.
Encourage and provide support for existing and
future shuttle and reverse commute service in
the County.
Advocate for additional transit service in Union
County.
Advocate for additional transit service in the
County, including the Union County
Sustainability Corridor bus rapid transit, as well
as transit access to the redevelopment area of
the Elizabeth Waterfront.
Support and advocate for the construction of
major infrastructure projects that would
enhance rail service in New Jersey.
These projects include the replacement of the
Portal Bridge, construction of the Hunter Flyover
and construction of the Gateway Project, as well
as normal state-of-good repair projects.
Develop a countywide truck route inventory
and wayfinding signage to major industrial sites
for truck drivers entering Union County.
Using the information from the prior
recommendation, this map would show
preferred truck routes of travel and inform them
of height and weight restrictions on County
roads.
Incorporate modern truck access needs in
future roadway improvements on County
roads.
Future improvements would be designed to
accommodate tractor-trailer combination
vehicles with 53-foot long, 102-inch wide
trailers. This would be implemented on an
ongoing basis as roadway improvements are
programmed.
Support the improvement of traffic signal
synchronization along corridors where truck
traffic is projected to grow in the next 25 years.
Traffic signal coordination is a cost-efficient
measure to expand roadway capacity without
widening roads. In Union County, the routes of
interest include Routes 509, 514, 527, 613, 617,
619, 621 and 622 under County jurisdiction and
Routes 1&9 and Route 27 under state
jurisdiction.
Support and promote the planning and
construction of the Tremley Point Connector
Road.
The areas served by this road could support up
to six million square feet of industrial
development. The connector road and the
existing rail connections in the area would
maximize opportunities for the Tremley Point
area.
Continue partnering with NJDOT and the
railroad industry to preserve abandoned
railroad rights-of-way.
The restoration of freight rail service on
abandoned alignments can support the
redevelopment of adjacent industrial sites.
Work with municipalities in close proximity to
Port Newark/Elizabeth and Newark Airport and
municipalities with industrial redevelopment
opportunities, to maintain industrial zoning and
encourage industrial development.
As a County with substantial freight-intensive
industries and excellent transportation assets,
Union County can play a valuable role in
ensuring that transportation planning is
coordinated with industrial land use decisions at
the local level.
Engage the Port Authority of NY&NJ (PANYNJ)
on an ongoing basis to identify changes in cargo
activity at major facilities.
Coordination with the PANYNJ will enable the
County to address these challenges and
capitalize on these opportunities associated with
cargo activity in a proactive manner. Support
improvements to the Kapkowski Road/North
Avenue area of Elizabeth.
Coordinate with the Port Authority of NY&NJ
(PANYNJ) to assess local benefits and impacts
of any proposed upgrades and enhancements
to increase capacity at Newark Liberty
International Airport.
Union County will likely face challenges and
opportunities with any capacity expansion at
Newark Airport, including passenger and/or
cargo activity. Potential relocation or
displacement of on-airport facilities to offairport
locations will have benefits and impacts
for local municipalities and the County can help
stakeholders address these issues proactively.
Continue playing an active role in organizations
where Union County has a strong presence and
a vested interest in ongoing planning and
advocacy efforts.
Union County has been an active participant in
organizations such as the NJTPA (including its
RTAC and Freight Initiatives Committee) and a
collaborative partner with public agencies in the
region. Ongoing involvement with these
organizations and partners will help the County
meet its vision of maintaining a safe, reliable,
multi-modal transportation system that
enhances economic activity and quality of life for
all its communities.
Prioritize connections with existing bicycle and
pedestrian facilities such as the East Coast
Greenway.
Connecting new facilities to existing ones is the
best way to strengthen the bicycle and
pedestrian network in Union County.
Continue to support Complete Streets
implementation in municipalities that have
adopted a Complete Streets policy.
Union County works closely with all its
municipalities when planning improvements,
including those related to Complete Streets.
Encourage municipalities to install bicycle
parking facilities in downtown business
districts, near transit, schools and other
destinations.
People must have a secure and convenient place
to park their bikes once they reach their
destination. Not having a well-planned bicycle
parking option can discourage bicycling and lead
to theft, damage and locked bikes becoming an
obstacle to pedestrians or damaging trees.
Support municipal Safe Routes to School
programs near County roads and assist with
state and federal funding for identified
improvements.
Work with the municipalities, school districts
and the Safe Routes to School Regional
Coordinator at the Transportation Management
Association (TMA) to support funding proposals,
enforcement campaigns and education
outreach, especially at the middle school level.
Implement the recommendations from the
Union County Parks, Recreation & Open Space
Master Plan (2010).
A goal of the Plan is to provide an
interconnected system of high quality,
accessible, multi-use trails and greenway
corridors. The Plan recommends exploring the
possibility of utilizing abandoned railway ROW to
link County Parks, including the Rahway Valley
Railroad.
Utilize Plan4Safety crash data to identify high
crash corridors and intersections on County
roadways and work with municipalities and
local organizations to conduct bicycle and
pedestrian audits to identify pedestrian and
bicycle improvements.
Many communities have had successful
experiences with volunteer efforts by local
walking clubs, seniors groups or other civic
organizations to perform periodic site visits and
report back on areas that may require further
investigation. This can help to focus efforts by
County staff.
Encourage use of alternative modes of
transportation as opposed to the single
occupancy vehicle.
Since federal legislation mandates that the
region reduce single vehicle occupancy miles,
the County should encourage increased walking
and bicycling.
Continue to participate in the development of
local Bicycle and/or Pedestrian Plans and
studies.
The County currently engages with municipal
stakeholders to analyze, coordinate and develop
Plans. Continuing to provide technical expertise
and leadership is a key to advancing walking and
bicycling across the County.
Update The Land Development Standards of the
County of Union and Union County Design
Standards for Development to encourage a five
foot minimum for sidewalks and a minimum
eight foot bikeway path.
Current County standards include a four foot
minimum for sidewalks. FHWA recommends a
minimum five foot sidewalk and according to
United States Access Board, the minimum clear
width of a pedestrian access route shall be 60
inches (five feet), exclusive of the width of the
curb. The Access Board recommends that the
pedestrian access route be no less than 72
inches (six feet) wide in high use areas,
especially in downtown urban environments,
near shopping centers, schools and civic
facilities. The AASHTO Guide for the
Development of Bicycle Facilities (2012) specifies
a minimum paved width of a path is ten feet and
in very rare circumstances a reduced width of
eight feet.
Support aviation services within Union County
at Newark Liberty International Airport and
Linden Airport through coordination of
planning and collaboration with multiple
stakeholders.
Improving and maintaining sound transportation
infrastructure designed to support the growth of
Union County and better serve all users, will
improve access to and from the airport as well as
the economic success of surrounding areas.
Interagency objectives will be a large component
of supporting aviation in the County.
Encourage development of land uses that are
compatible with Airport traveler’s needs, such
as hotels and restaurants, off-airport parking
facilities, etc.
Air travel compatible development would
encourage air travelers to utilize services in
Union County.
Support measures to mitigate the adverse
impacts of air travel on County residents.
Examine ways to mitigate noise from traffic.
Prioritization should incorporate mechanisms
and resources necessary to effectively address
environmental justice issues.
Monitor any proposed changes in aviation
facilities and services.
Identify existing infrastructure that can be
elevated and work with partner agencies to
pursue funding for this work. When feasible, site
future infrastructure out of or above future
flood-prone areas.
Removing or avoiding placement of
infrastructure in flood-prone locations, when
feasible, will help maintain an efficient, reliable
and safe rail, roadway and transit system.
Establish and frequently update emergency
detours and evacuation routes.
This would have to be a coordinated effort. OEM
would probably monitor the changing flood
conditions and broadcast the information about
detours and routes, but the agency or office that
establishes the evacuation routes would
continue to be in charge of establishing them.
Continue to improve the effectiveness of the
planning process by providing opportunities for
public participation in the planning and
development of plans and projects.
Obtaining a broad representation of public input
is an integral part of the planning process which
helps to ensure that decisions are made in
consideration of public needs and preferences.
Continue participation in subregional planning
activities with the NJTPA including the Regional
Transportation Advisory Committee,
Subregional Studies Program, Local Capital
Project Delivery Program and Subregional
Transportation Planning Program.
Support regional transportation committees to
coordinate policies and ordinances between
municipalities.
Continue reviewing proposed subdivisions that
affect County roads and site plans along County
roads for transit and transportation impacts
and to ensure that they are designed with
consideration to bicycle and pedestrian access.
The authority to approve applications for site
plans and the subdivision of land is a major
responsibility of county planning boards in New
Jersey.
Maximize obtaining federal and state funding
for County road and transit projects.
Applying for Federal and State Aid Programs is a
method for the County to advance projects that
enhance safety and maintain infrastructure.
Monitor, analyze and make recommendations
concerning legislative proposals and
disseminate information to municipalities,
freeholders and state and federal legislative
representatives.
Continue to support legislation that provides
funding for the transportation system and is
consistent with the goals, objectives and policies
of the County.
Reexamine and revise, if necessary, the Union
County Transportation Master Plan every five
years.
Reexamining the Plan offers an opportunity for
the County to see which aspects of the Plan
might be in need of updating.
Reduce the travel lanes to 11-foot lanes, which will be striped with high visibility reflective markings, to
accommodate both on-road and off-road bicycle facilities.
Build an off-road shared use path along the east side (northbound) side of River Road. The 10-foot path should
be continuous and separated by a 6-foot vegetative buffer or a 2-foot barrier. Install yield priority signs along the
shared use path to reinforce that bicycle traffic must yield to pedestrians.
On the west side (southbound) of River Road create a connected system of pedestrian facilities throughout the
corridor by installing a 5-foot sidewalk where it is missing or is physically deficient.
Install a 5-foot bike lane along both sides of River Road. The bike lane will be continuous and paired with a
designated painted buffer space separating the bicycle lane from the adjacent motor vehicle travel lane. For most
of the corridor the buffer is 2-foot wide with limited exceptions. Buffers appeal to a wider cross-section of bicycle
users because they provide greater shy distance between motor vehicles and bicyclists. In addition, buffers
provide space for bicyclists to pass another bicyclist without encroaching into the adjacent vehicle travel lane.
Install ADA compliant curb ramps and detectable warning surfaces at locations where they are missing or
substandard. This improvement is also part of the mid-term and short-term concepts.
Install pedestrian hybrid beacons at five (5) locations within the corridor to provide safe crossings for pedestrians,
which is also part of the mid-term concept.
Adjust pedestrian crossing times at signalized intersections in order to provide adequate time for pedestrians to
cross the roadway, which is also part of the mid-term and short-term concepts.
Where necessary, replace pedestrian signal heads with a countdown display pedestrian signal head to help
pedestrians assess how much time they have to finish crossing the street, which is also part of the mid-term and
short-term concepts
Consolidate and/or eliminate bus stops to provide shorter bus trips due to less stops; and therefore less dwell
time, higher speeds, and decreased travel time.
Install a series of bus stop alternatives that provide bus bays at bus stops throughout the corridor; and therefore,
a protected area for both the transit users and the stopped bus away from the travel lane, providing safe access
for the transit users and reduce delay to vehicles traveling on River Road. These alternatives are also part of the
mid-term concept.
Install ADA compliant bus shelters at existing bus stops, which is also part of the mid-term and short-term
concepts.
Install intersection crossing markings to guide bicyclists on a safe and direct path through intersections, including
driveways, which is also part of the mid-term concept.
Install colorized advance bicycle boxes at high conflict locations especially where there are frequent bicycle leftturns
and/or motorist right-turns. This is also part of the mid-term concept.
Install shared lane markings along the corridor. Frequent, visible placement of markings is essential. Along River
Road they should be placed every 50-100 feet. While generally not a preferred treatment on higher volume
streets, shared lane markings help to reinforce the legitimacy of bicycle traffic on the street and recommend
proper bicyclist positioning. Because shared lane markings do not designate a particular part of the roadways for
the exclusive use of bicycles they are not considered a facility type. Rather, a shared lane marking is a pavement
marking that is used to support a complete bikeway network.
On both sides of River Road create a connected system of pedestrian facilities throughout the corridor by
installing a 5’ sidewalk where it is missing or is physically deficient. This is also included as part of the short-term
concept.
Install 5-foot bike lanes where there is sufficient right-of-way; sharrows should be utilized where there is
insufficient space for bike lanes.
Install "through bicycle lanes" where there are bike lanes and right-turn only lanes at intersections in order to
assist bicyclists to correctly position themselves to avoid conflicts with turning vehicles. Where there isn't room for
a through bicycle lane, a combined bicycle lane/turn lane should be considered, especially along the southern
four-lane portion of the corridor.
Provide bicycle detection at all signalized intersections.
Install wayfinding signs to key destinations with the direction, distance, destination and riding time for bicyclists
from current location including connections to the Hudson River Waterfront Walkway.
Enhance gateway treatments such as welcome signs and landscaping at the northern entrance of the corridor
near Bruce Reynolds Boulevard, at State Route 5 and the southern border of the county near Churchill Road.
Install shared lane markings along the corridor. Frequent, visible placement of markings is essential. Along River
Road they should be placed every 50-100 feet. While generally not a preferred treatment on higher volume
streets, shared lane markings help to reinforce the legitimacy of bicycle traffic on the street and recommend
proper bicyclist positioning. The shared lane marking is not a facility type, it is a pavement marking.
Install “MAY USE FULL LANE” signs (R4-11) along the northern 4-lane segment of the corridor where no bicycle
lanes or adjacent shoulders usable by bicyclists are present and lane widths are <14'.
Install bicycle “WRONG WAY” signs and “RIDE WITH TRAFFIC” plaques (R5-1b, R9-3CP) back-to-back with
other signs to minimize visibility to other traffic where wrong-way riding by bicyclists is frequently observed.
Create secure and safe bicycle parking at key bicycling destinations (or starting points) including schools,
shopping centers, recreational facilities, public buildings, and parks throughout the corridor.
Provide and promote bicycle parking, showering and clothes changing facilities at worksites, transportation
terminals, and other destinations.
Conduct a feasibility study to determine a suitable location to install a bicycle repair station for commuters and
residents to ride their bikes to the ferry terminal with secure, sheltered parking.
An unsignalized mid-block crosswalk will be striped at Maple Street and pedestrians will be directed with signage
to cross at this location and at Central Avenue, north of Henry Hudson Drive.
Install yield priority signs along the shared use path to
reinforce that bicycle traffic should yield to pedestrians
Conduct a feasibility study to determine how to best
implement the concept of super stops on the corridor
and to gather information for the best location and
design of the super stops.
Provide bike racks on all public transit vehicles that
travel through the corridor
Stripe a high visibility crosswalk and bicycle specific
crossing treatment (“crossbike”) across Hudson
Terrace at the GWB South walkway and a high visibility
crosswalk across Hudson Terrace at the existing traffic
signal adjacent to the North walkway access
Stripe and sign a bicycle lane along Hudson Terrace
between the GWB and Sylvan Street, preserving the on
street parking where possible. This will target the high
crash intersections of Hudson Terrace at both Merkle
Street and Sylvan Street, increasing visibility and
expectation of potential conflict.
Conduct a Traffic Safety Fair to promote the various
safety messages and distribute information.
Conduct bicycle education classes for all adults and
mature teens, to improve their cycling skills
Introduce bicycle and pedestrian safety into the school
curriculum through programs such as WalkSafe™ or
BikeSafe™ or event based programs through SafeKids
or the Brain Injury Association of New Jersey
Send borough staff to bicycle and pedestrian specific
conferences/training/summits
Create a SRTS plan for all elementary and middle
schools
Create web-based traffic safety quizzes that include
bicyclist, pedestrian and motorist safety questions on
the Bergen County's website
Initiate a public education program/campaign, such as
Street Smarts, that uses a dual approach of media and
community relations to educate and raise community
awareness about traffic safety issues for all users
Work with Meadowlink TMA to incorporate a bike
commuter reimbursement program for Borough
employees
Install placards at bike parking locations instructing
people how their bikes should be secured to the rack
and what to do in the event of their bike being stolen
Increase enforcement relating to cycling (cyclists under
17 not wearing helmets; not stopping for pedestrians at
crosswalks or at stop signs and red lights.)
Increase the presence of police bicycle patrol units
Create and publicize police bike registration program
Provide comprehensive pedestrian and bicyclist-safety
training to police officers
Strictly enforce the Stop for pedestrian State law on
River Road
Strictly enforce the 35 mph speed limit on River Road
Conduct student travel surveys in all schools to
determine and measure how students travel to school,
unless already done as part of a Safe Routes to School
application and/or program.
Use data received from permanent traffic counts to
establish baseline data and to regularly measure the
number of bicyclists
Use Plan4Safety to track and evaluate pedestrian and
bicycle crashes, including crashes that do not involve a
motor vehicle; take action to address problems that led
to the crashes
Update the master plan to include a vision for the future
which includes TOD principles
Update the zoning code to support an updated master
plan that includes TOD principles. Either update
existing zoning districts or create a new zoning district
or overlay that specifically defines TOD principles and
where they are to be implemented.
Adopt regulation that incentivizes the creation of better
transit facilities and/or super stops for both new and
existing development.
Adopt a policy to install bicycle racks or other bicycle
storage at all existing and public buildings and
community facilities
Adopt an ordinance allowing riding on sidewalks that
includes: (1) No person shall ride a bicycle upon a
sidewalk at a speed greater than the walking speed of
pedestrians; (2) Persons riding a bicycle upon a
sidewalk shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian
and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and
passing any pedestrian; (3) Persons riding a bicycle
upon a sidewalk shall keep as close to the curb as is
practicable to allow pedestrians to walk along sidewalks
without impedance.
Adopt a Bicycle Parking Ordinance that: requires
developers, submitting planning or zoning board
applications, to offer a bicycle sharing facility as part of
their site design; incorporates a residential bike parking
ratio requirement into the municipal code; requires all
commercial buildings to provide off-street parking with
5% of the required vehicle parking made available for
bicycle parking
Adopt an ordinance to require taxicabs to affix "watch
for bikes" stickers in the following locations on the
vehicle: 1) driver's side mirror 2) the left and right rear
side window
Adopt a law that requires all commercial buildings to
provide off-street bike parking with 5% of required car
parking made available for bike parking
Implement and publicize a spot Maintenance &
Improvement Program that allows bicyclists and others
to alert DPW to any poor maintenance conditions or
hotspots for improvements such as potholes,
abandoned bikes, etc.
Regularly maintain a clear pathway on all sidewalks
and shared use paths
Regularly repaint crosswalks and bike lane
